=head1 NAME

Text::MagicTemplate::HTML - implements HTML-comment-like syntax for Text::MagicTemplate

=head1 SYNOPSIS

=over

=item the template

	<!--{my_identifier}-->content of the block<!--{/my_identifier}-->

=item the code

	use Text::MagicTemplate::HTML;
	$mt = new Text::MagicTemplate::HTML;

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<Text::MagicTemplate::HTML> is a custom syntax for B<Text::MagicTemplate>. It implements a HTML-comment-like syntax. If your output is a HTML text - or just because you prefer that particular look - you can use it instead of using the standard module.

The main advantages to use it are:

=over

=item *

You can add labels and blocks and the template will still be a valid HTML file.

=item *

You can edit the HTML template with a WYSIWYG editor, keeping a consistent preview of the final output

=item *

The normal HTML comments will be preserved in the final output, while the labels will be wiped out.

=back

Please, refer to the documentation of B<Text::MagicTemplate> in order to use it properly.

=head1 MARKERS

These are the default values of the markers that define the label.

        START_MARKER:   <!--{
        END_MARKER_ID:  /
        END_MARKER:     }-->

=head1 AUTHOR

Domizio Demichelis, <dd@4pro.net>.

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright (c)2002 Domizio Demichelis. All Rights Reserved. This module is free software; it may be used freely and redistributed for free providing this copyright header remains part of the module. You may not charge for the redistribution of this module. Selling this code without Domizio Demichelis' written permission is expressly forbidden.

This module may not be modified without first notifying the author (this is to enable me to track modifications). In all cases the copyright header should remain fully intact in all modifications.

This code is provided on an "As Is'' basis, without warranty, expressed or implied. The author disclaims all warranties with regard to this software, including all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness, in no event shall the author, Domizio Demichelis be liable for any special, indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever including but not limited to loss of use, data or profits. By using this module you agree to indemnify Domizio Demichelis from any liability that might arise from it is use. Should this code prove defective, you assume the cost of any and all necessary repairs, servicing, correction and any other costs arising directly or indrectly from it is use.

The copyright notice must remain fully intact at all times. Use of this program or its output constitutes acceptance of these terms.